README.md, before:

## GLF-OS based NixOS configuration

This repository is a flake-based NixOS configuration that uses GLF-OS as a base.

### Installation on New System

1. **Follow the GLFOS installer** on a new system which will generate a `configuration.nix` file with:
   - GLF optimizations (e.g., the right driver for your NVIDIA graphics card)
   - System-agnostic settings like `glf.environment.type` and `glf.environment.edition` (which should always be the same on any cognito OS)

2. **Manual setup** (TODO: automate this process):
   - Create a new folder for your device in `system-hardware-shims/` (e.g., `system-hardware-shims/my-laptop/`)
   - Move the autogenerated `hardware-configuration.nix` to your device folder
   - Move the autogenerated `configuration.nix` to your device folder and rename it to `firmware-configuration.nix`
   - Add your device name to the `hosts` list in `flake.nix`
   - Build with `./build.sh your-device-name switch` or `nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#your-device-name`

3. **Clean up system-agnostic settings** from the generated configuration:
   - Remove `glf.environment.type` and `glf.environment.edition` (these are now in the system-interface)
   - Keep hardware-specific settings like NVIDIA config, user accounts, bootloader, etc.

### System-Agnostic vs Hardware-Specific Settings

**System-Agnostic** (stays in `system-interface/default.nix`):
- `glf.environment.type` and `glf.environment.edition` - same across all cognito OS systems
- GNOME configuration and extensions
- Application packages and user scripts
- Input device configurations (libinput, maccel, udev rules)

**Hardware-Specific** (moves to `system-hardware-shims/device-name/firmware-configuration.nix`):
- NVIDIA graphics configuration
- User accounts and passwords (generated by GLFOS installer)
- Bootloader configuration (GRUB settings)
- Hostname and networking configuration

**Location-Specific** (debated - could be system-specific or hardware-specific):
- **Timezone** - Different for different physical locations (UK vs China PC)
- **Keyboard layout** - PC-specific (different keyboards/regions)
- **i18n settings** - Region-specific (language preferences)
- **Networking** - Could vary by location/network setup

### Layout

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A[/flake.nix/] -->|defines| B[nixosConfigurations."GLF-OS"]
  A -->|inputs| C[glf-channels]
  A -->|inputs| D[nixpkgs]
  A -->|inputs| E[nixpkgs-unstable]
  A -->|inputs| F[glf (GLF-OS root flake)]

  B -->|modules| G[system-interface/]
  G --> H[system-interface/default.nix]
  H --> I[system-hardware-shims/device-name/]
  I --> J[hardware-configuration.nix]
  I --> K[firmware-configuration.nix]

  subgraph "Auto-updates"
    L[system.autoUpgrade] -->|timer| M[nixos-upgrade.timer]
    L -->|service| N[nixos-upgrade.service]
  end

  H -. enables .-> L
```

### Build Script

Use the included interactive `build.sh` script for easy building and switching:

```bash
# Run the interactive build manager
./build.sh
```

The script will present you with:
1. A list of available devices to choose from
2. Actions to perform:
   - **Build configuration** (compile only)
   - **Build and switch** to configuration
   - **Build, switch, and reboot** (perfect for testing new builds)
   - **Test configuration** (dry run)
   - **List available devices**
   - **Exit**
3. Option to perform multiple actions in one session

No parameters needed - just run `./build.sh` and follow the interactive prompts!

### Notes

- GLF curated channels are followed via `inputs.glf-channels` and `nixpkgs.follows` in `flake.nix`.
- System-agnostic configuration lives in `system-interface/default.nix`.
- Hardware-specific configuration lives in `system-hardware-shims/device-name/`.
- Automatic updates use NixOS's built-in auto-upgrade service (a systemd timer) that periodically rebuilds from this flake and switches to it.
- When adding a new device, remember to add it to the `hosts` list in `flake.nix`.

Commit message:

feat: add option to regenerate hardware configuration in build script

README.md, after:

## GLF-OS based NixOS configuration

This repository is a flake-based NixOS configuration that uses GLF-OS as a base.

### Installation on New System

1. **Follow the GLFOS installer** on a new system which will generate a `configuration.nix` file with:
   - GLF optimizations (e.g., the right driver for your NVIDIA graphics card)
   - System-agnostic settings like `glf.environment.type` and `glf.environment.edition` (which should always be the same on any cognito OS)

2. **Manual setup** (TODO: automate this process):
   - Create a new folder for your device in `system-hardware-shims/` (e.g., `system-hardware-shims/my-laptop/`)
   - Move the autogenerated `hardware-configuration.nix` to your device folder
   - Move the autogenerated `configuration.nix` to your device folder and rename it to `firmware-configuration.nix`
   - Add your device name to the `hosts` list in `flake.nix`
   - Build with `./build.sh your-device-name switch` or `nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#your-device-name`

3. **Clean up system-agnostic settings** from the generated configuration:
   - Remove `glf.environment.type` and `glf.environment.edition` (these are now in the system-interface)
   - Keep hardware-specific settings like NVIDIA config, user accounts, bootloader, etc.

### System-Agnostic vs Hardware-Specific Settings

**System-Agnostic** (stays in `system-interface/default.nix`):
- `glf.environment.type` and `glf.environment.edition` - same across all cognito OS systems
- GNOME configuration and extensions
- Application packages and user scripts
- Input device configurations (libinput, maccel, udev rules)

**Hardware-Specific** (moves to `system-hardware-shims/device-name/firmware-configuration.nix`):
- NVIDIA graphics configuration
- User accounts and passwords (generated by GLFOS installer)
- Bootloader configuration (GRUB settings)
- Hostname and networking configuration

**Location-Specific** (debated - could be system-specific or hardware-specific):
- **Timezone** - Different for different physical locations (UK vs China PC)
- **Keyboard layout** - PC-specific (different keyboards/regions)
- **i18n settings** - Region-specific (language preferences)
- **Networking** - Could vary by location/network setup

### Layout

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A[/flake.nix/] -->|defines| B[nixosConfigurations."GLF-OS"]
  A -->|inputs| C[glf-channels]
  A -->|inputs| D[nixpkgs]
  A -->|inputs| E[nixpkgs-unstable]
  A -->|inputs| F[glf (GLF-OS root flake)]

  B -->|modules| G[system-interface/]
  G --> H[system-interface/default.nix]
  H --> I[system-hardware-shims/device-name/]
  I --> J[hardware-configuration.nix]
  I --> K[firmware-configuration.nix]

  subgraph "Auto-updates"
    L[system.autoUpgrade] -->|timer| M[nixos-upgrade.timer]
    L -->|service| N[nixos-upgrade.service]
  end

  H -. enables .-> L
```

### Build Script

Use the included interactive `build.sh` script for easy building and switching:

```bash
# Run the interactive build manager
./build.sh
```

The script will present you with:
1. A list of available devices to choose from
2. Actions to perform:
   - **Build configuration** (compile only)
   - **Build and switch** to configuration
   - **Build, switch, and reboot** (perfect for testing new builds)
   - **Test configuration** (dry run)
   - **Regenerate hardware configuration** (for hardware changes)
   - **List available devices**
   - **Exit**
3. Option to perform multiple actions in one session

No parameters needed - just run `./build.sh` and follow the interactive prompts!

### Hardware Changes

When you change your desktop hardware (new GPU, motherboard, etc.):

1. **For basic hardware changes** (CPU, RAM, storage):
   - Use the **"Regenerate hardware configuration"** option in `build.sh`
   - This runs `nixos-generate-config` to detect new hardware
   - Updates `hardware-configuration.nix` with new hardware detection

2. **For firmware/driver changes** (NVIDIA GPU, bootloader, etc.):
   - **Recommended**: Run a fresh GLFOS installer
   - The installer generates both `hardware-configuration.nix` AND `firmware-configuration.nix`
   - Gets you the latest GLF optimizations and driver configurations
   - Ensures proper NVIDIA setup, bootloader config, and other firmware-specific settings

### Notes

- GLF curated channels are followed via `inputs.glf-channels` and `nixpkgs.follows` in `flake.nix`.
- System-agnostic configuration lives in `system-interface/default.nix`.
- Hardware-specific configuration lives in `system-hardware-shims/device-name/`.
- Device-specific settings (NVIDIA, bootloader, hostname, timezone, etc.) live in `system-hardware-shims/{device}/firmware-configuration.nix`.
- The `hosts` list in `flake.nix` is automatically generated from the `system-hardware-shims/` directory structure.
- Automatic updates use NixOS's built-in auto-upgrade service (a systemd timer) that periodically rebuilds from this flake and switches to it.
